Add application layout with examples and docs (#3175)
canonical-web-and-design/vanilla-framework: templates/docs/layouts/application.md

---
wrapper_template: '_layouts/docs.html'
context:
  title: Application | Layouts
---

## Application layout

<hr>

### Structure

The application layout is a full-screen grid (represented by a root element with `l-application` class) consisting of several areas (represented by elements with class names such as `l-navigation`, `l-main`, etc.). The application layout styling defines withe positioning and size of all the areas on different screen sizes (for example navigation sidebar will be fully expanded on large screens, but collapsible on small screens).

The minimal application layout should consist of the root element (`l-application`) and a navigation area (`l-navigation-bar`, `l-navigation`) with a main content area (`l-main`). The other areas (`l-aside` and `l-status`) are optional and may be added to provide additional information as required by given application use case.

#### Root element

The root of application layout (usually it will be a direct child of the document `body`) is an element with `l-application` class. This element defines the layout grid, all areas of the application layout need to be direct children of it.

#### Navigation

> To provide the full responsive behaviour for small mobile screens and large desktop screens navigation in application layout consists of two areas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To provide fully responsive behaviour for small and large screen navigation. The navigation of this layout consists of two areas.
```

> Element with `l-navigation-bar` class name represents a navigation bar on top of a mobile screen that is used to toggle the navigation sidebar drawer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Element with `l-navigation-bar` class name represents a navigation bar on top of a small screen that is used to toggle the navigation sidebar drawer.
```

Element with `l-navigation` represents the navigation sidebar. Its direct child needs to be a `l-navigation__drawer` element which represents the responsive collapsible side navigation drawer which has different behaviours on various screen sizes.

> On a mobile screen the `l-navigation-bar` is visible on top of the screen and side navigation drawer renders as an overlay from the left side of the screen. The drawer can be fully collapsed by adding `is-collapsed` class to the `l-navigation` element, which should be done by a button or a link in the `l-navigation-bar`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On a small screen, the `l-navigation-bar` is visible on top of the screen and side navigation drawer renders as an off-canvas overlay from the left side of the screen. The drawer can be fully collapsed by adding `is-collapsed` class to the `l-navigation` element, which should be done by a button or a link in the `l-navigation-bar`.
```

On medium or large screen sizes `l-navigation-bar` is not needed and is hidden, because side navigation is always visible on the left side of the screen.

> On medium screens the side navigation drawer will be collapsed to a width of `3rem` and expand and an overlay of hover. Users should also be given an option to pin the side navigation, which can be achieved by adding `is-pinned` class to the `l-navigation` element.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On medium screens, the side navigation drawer will be collapsed to a width of `3rem`. Which expends with an overlay on hover. Users can also be given the option to pin the side navigation, which can be achieved by adding `is-pinned` class to the `l-navigation` element.
```

> On large screen sizes the side navigation drawer will be always expanded and the `is-pinned` or `is-collapsed` classes will have no effect on it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On large screen sizes the side navigation drawer will be always expanded and the `is-pinned` or `is-collapsed` classes will have no effect.
```

#### Main content area

The main content area is an element with `l-main` class. On any screen size it's going to take all available space not occupied by other areas of the application layout.

#### Aside area

The aside area is used to display additional content, usually triggered from within main content area. It is an element with `l-aside` class. By default it is rendered as an overlay on top of main content, aligned to the right side, stretched from top to bottom of the main content area. The width of the aside content area is flexible and determined by the width of its contents.

> Aside content area can be detached from right, top or bottom by adding a respective margin to it with JavaScript.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The aside content area can be detached from right, top or bottom by adding a respective margin to it with JavaScript.
```

It can also be pinned, similarly to the side navigation area, by adding `is-pinned` class to the `l-aside` element. Pinned aside area is rendered to the right of the main content and makes the main content area narrower.

#### Status area

> The status area is positioned on the bottom of the screen and stretches over full width of main and aside areas. It's meant to contain status bar or similar short always-available information. Its height is defined by its contents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The status area is positioned on the bottom of the screen and stretches over the full width of main and aside areas. It's meant to contain a status bar or short always-available information. Its height is defined by its contents.
```
